
Hitler quickly set about dismantling German democracy. Following the Reichstag Fire, he forced the passing of an Enabling Act through the Reichstag, which gave him unlimited powers for four years. He then eliminated any potential sources of opposition: other political parties, trades unions and even Ernst Rohm, the leader of the SA. By the time President Hindenburg died in August 1934, Hitler was able to declare himself Führer and had absolute power in Germany.
Nazi Germany was a totalitarian state, which means that the government sought to control every aspect of life. Germans experienced this through four areas
Hitler used three weapons to control the German people:
There was limited resistance to the Nazis, mostly because the police state was so effective at crushing dissent. It is hard to know exactly how much opposition there was to Hitler and his regime, though religious figures, underground members of the Social Democratic Party (SPD), communists, and the young did provide some resistance.
Hitler achieved virtually full employment through rearmament, National Service and marginalising groups like the Jews. However, living standards for working class Germans did not really improve and workers were expected to take part in Nazi Party schemes like Strength Through Joy, which gave them cheap holidays, in return for giving up their trade union rights.
The Nazis aspired to achieve autarky, or economic self-sufficiency, but in general the economy was geared towards preparing for a future war. As such, workers were expected to work long hours for modest pay and to stay loyal to the Nazi regime.
The Nazis’ social policies affected two groups in society the most – women and young people:
In addition, the Nazis sought to control or limit the influence of  Christianity. They set up an official state church, called the Confessing Church, which adapted protestant teachings to Nazi ideology. Also, despite signing a Concordat with the Pope in which Hitler promised to leave the Catholic Church alone if it stayed out of politics, the Nazis attempted to infiltrate it and placed restrictions on worship.
Nazi ideology centred on the belief that the Aryan race of northern Europe was superior to all others and that some races were sub-human. Nazis also believed any weaknesses in the Aryan race, such as disabled people, should be weeded out to maintain racial purity. As such, many groups in Nazi Germany were persecuted, as well as the Nazis political enemies. This persecution involved sterilisation, ‘euthanasia’, imprisonment in concentration camps and the loss of civil rights.
German Jews were the most frequently targeted minority group. Their rights were progressively taken away, including their German citizenship. The onset of war in 1939 escalated the nature and frequency of racist violence. The confusion of war gave the Nazis opportunity to plan and almost succeed in the murder of Europe’s Jewish population. 6 million Jews perished in camps along with roughly 1 million other enemies of the Nazi state.

