
In the 15th century approximately one in every 10 people in England was foreign-born, and in London it was one in six. People came for many different reasons and everyone had their own story. Apart from artisans and craftspeople, the most common causes for migration were:
From the 1220s, wealthy banking families from Lombardy in what is now Italy began to set up in London, lending money to kings such as Edward I who used it for wars and castle building in Wales. They replaced the Jewish moneylenders who were eventually expelled when they were no longer needed.
At the same time, German merchants from the Hanseatic League (who traded between northern European cities) set up a trading settlement called the steelyard on the banks of the river Thames in London.  It was a community with its own chapel and accommodation. The king gave these bankers and merchants a Charter in 1303, allowing them to trade in wool and other goods at reduced tax rates. There were also Spanish and Portuguese wine merchants in some English ports.
There was a dark trade in enslaved young people from Iceland centred around the ports of Bristol and Hull. Some were kidnapped from their homes by English sailors, while others were sold by their poor and penniless parents. They were brought to England by force and then sold, often to artisans  who used them as servants or labourers. Records show that there were Icelandic children in several towns in the English Midlands.
Some foreigners who came to settle were from the nobility and royalty. They included foreign nobles, some of them refugees, arriving under Crown protection. When foreign princesses arrived to marry kings, they brought many relatives and attendants who settled with them. Migrants with good connections could get letters of denization from the King, granting them the right to stay.
Servants and labourers were, by far, the largest group which came to work across England. Many of them were from Ireland, Scotland and France. Households in the towns and artisans’ workshops all over the country depended on foreign labour.

